Cisco Discovery protocol (CDP)
CDP is a Cisco proprietary protocol that is used for collectin drectly connected neightbor device information like hardware, software, device name details, etc...

How CDP Works:
All Cisco devices transmit CDP packets periodically (default tim interval value is 60sec). These packets advertise a time-to-live(TTL) value in seconds, which indicates the number of seconds that the packet must be retained before it can be discarded (default value is 180sec)

CPD packets are sent with a TTL value that is nonzero after an interface is enabled and with a ttl of zero immediately before an interface is down. This provides quick state discovery.

All Cisco devices receive CDP packets, process them and chache the information in the packet. Cisco devices never forward a CDP packet. If any information changes from the last received packet, the new information is cached and the older information is discarded even if it's TTL value has not yet expired.

Notes for CDP:

CDP only works on directly connected interfaces.

CDP messages are generated every 60second, hold-down timer is 180sec

Messages are destined to L2 Multicast address 01:00:0c:cc:cc:cc

Devices that receive CDP messages on an interface from other devices the information is stored in a table that can be viewd using the show CDP neighbors command.

CDP table information is refreshed eeach time an announcment is received from neighbor, and the holdtime for that entry is reinitialized.
The holdtime specifies the lifetime of an entry in the table - if no announcements are received from a device for a period in excess of the holdtime, the device information is discarded and wiped from the table

CDP runs on all media that support Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP), including LAN, Frame Relay, and Asynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM) physical media.

CDP runs over the data link layer only. Therefore, two systems that support different network-layer protocols can learn about each other.

CDP Version-2 (CDPv2) is the most recent release of the protocol and provides more intelligent device tracking features. These features include a reporting mechanism, which allows more rapid erro checking, therby reduces costly downtime. Errors reported inclued: Mismatched native VLAN IDs on connected ports and Mismatched Port-duplex states between connected devices.

CDP can be enabled on GRE tunnel wich is useful in DMVPN. A central hub can use "router odr" to insert a default route into the spoke so spoke can route viea the hub. in addition odr can be redistributed to other routing protocols. 

https://learningnetwork.cisco.com/s/article/cisco-discovery-protocol-cdp-x
